You could have called this book The Prodigy, I think, not just The Soloist.
Why The Soloist?
Well, the reason I considered The Prodigy, we talked about titles that had Prodigy in it.
But the thing is, in my mind, it's not really about Prodigy so much as it's about how people in general have to deal with that gap.
between the way they wish their lives were, what they think their lives should be at this moment, and where their lives really are.
I think we all cope with that at one time or another, but I, for the sake of telling a story, thought it would be interesting to create an extreme case.
I was thinking in my mind, since how can I create a character
for whom this would be a real problem that would throw it into an extra intense light.
And I thought, well, why not have someone whose life, whose real life actually did match his expectations for a while and then have it taken away?
So that was really what I began with.
But then it's interesting that in the writing of it, of course, I had to explore a lot about prodigies and all.
And so, of course, that is a strong theme in the book.
My initial intention was for it to be about something that we'd all be familiar with, a little bit like the book Remains of the Day.
You mentioned that in the PW interview.
Yeah, oh, that book.
It's a great book.
It's so good.
I just loved that so much.
That really was a big influence when I was writing this book.
Really?
I think so.
People see his name, and if they know very little about him, they think he's a Japanese writer.
Yeah.
But in fact, he's an English writer.
Yeah, yeah.
And he is very much, I think, which is important.
I mean, he's writing in the English tradition.
That's no big point.
I think it's really amusing for him that so many people who have read his books, and even reviews, have said, you know,
He's so much within the Japanese tradition, and it must really sometimes pester him.
But hey, that's a tradition I wouldn't mind being associated with.
It's a lovely book.
And I understand the film is really different.
Oh, it's beautiful.
Have you seen it?
Yes, yes.
And I went fully expecting that I couldn't like it nearly as much, and I liked it as much.
It's just different enough that it stands on its own.
And of course, the actors in it are...
My wife and I went to see it and we were supposed to go to dinner with friends afterwards, and we had cried so hard during the movie we had to stop at a 7-Eleven parking lot just to get ourselves arranged.
That's funny.
Did you start with that single premise?
Because you really do have three themes writing for this book, maybe three, two, three.
No, actually the original premise, the original problem that I got kind of
that started to nag at me that I wanted to resolve through a fictional story was the problem, well I'll describe how the problem was presented to me.
I was in a car and I overheard a conversation between two people in the front seat.
One woman said, you know I just read an article about Asian philosophy and they say that these Zen masters
have achieved psychological freedom, that they are no longer burdened by our social conventions and our notions of right and wrong, that they realize these are relative positions.
She said, do you suppose that's possible?
And then the other person said, I really don't know.
And so this first woman said, see, I have a problem with that, though.
If a Zen master has transcended our social conventions, how could you tell the difference between him and a psychopath?
And then I remember afterwards, it kept bugging me, and I thought, that's a good question, because actually we judge people as being either religious geniuses or psychopaths according to our social conventions and our ideas of ethical wisdom and all.
So how do we tell the difference?
And I really got so attracted to the problem of how to articulate the difference.
I think we all feel there's a difference, but how do you articulate it?
So originally...
I got the idea of this trial of the Zen monster, but in the early drafts I realized, though, to make that the focus of the story, it was a little bit too hitting the nail on the head.
It got a little bit dry, and I felt it would be more interesting to tell that story as seen or heard by someone who would be indirectly affected by it.
And he is working out this other major, I don't want to call it a crisis in his life, but certainly he's at one of these watershed points where
I mean with the young man that he's finally decided to teach and he's astonished by the talent.
I mean they are working together I think in a very interesting kind of a way.
It is interesting now that you mentioned it, it is kind of a flip on the Amadeus theme isn't it?
Your character is certainly not mediocre.
The protagonist is not mediocre, and also he doesn't really resent the kid.
I think maybe he sees the kid as his chance.
Or at least eventually, I think.
At first he doesn't know what to think, I think, because it reminds him of what he thinks he should be doing, and that's painful.
Should be doing or could be doing?
Is there acceptance on his part that it's not likely to be for him?
I think there is.
I hope that there is toward the end of the story, but I wanted it to be that toward the beginning you feel that he still has not been able to accept the idea that this is going to go on forever.
He may be able to say that, but in his heart he still feels like a bit of a ghost, so insubstantial.
A sense of identity is being a concert musician, and he's not a concert musician.
At least in my imagination it seems it would be hard for him to feel that he has any life at all until he gets back to who he really is.
It's not really a Pygmalion theme, is it?
You know I'm not familiar enough with that story.
You shape somebody in your image.
His image, per se, is an expression of excellence I guess.
Yeah, I think that it eluded him I think.
I feel you're right that when he sees the boy at first it's a little bit of an aggravation because to be reminded that this is, it reminds him of his glory days.
But I think though for someone like Reinhardt, once he hears the boy play he cannot deny
He can't deny the boy's talent.
He's so attracted to it.
It's music.
It's beautiful music.
He's got to help.
So at least that's how I saw it.
We just played the Amadeus tape again for that fifth or sixth time.
And it's amazing when suddenly everybody gets, I mean he's furious on the one hand, but
I think my favorite scene in that movie is when he's reading the manuscript pages and he's hearing it in his head and they finally just drop out of his hands.
Actually I said to my wife, I said this is one of the great moments of movies.
I think because I've very rarely seen the creative process
He's playing the film.
In other words, he's hearing the sounds.
I can't read music, but he's dictating the requiem.
He's hearing the chorus.
It really is a nice visual kind of explanation I think of what happens creatively.
It's not seated in any way, but I can think of it.
Terrific.
One thing I didn't know until I read this, and I just read the PWM interview this morning, I assume of course, obviously the photo of you, but I didn't realize that you come from a tradition, perhaps the similarities in the experience.
I'm sure the character is unique, he's an imaginary character.
But tell me a little bit about the influences here.
Well, my mother is a concert harpsichordist.
And so growing up, of course, from the time I was, as long as I can remember, I remember going to her concert, seeing her on stage, and playing that beautiful music, and also getting that applause at the end.
And I think as a little kid, I took up the cello originally mainly to please, to be more like her, to please her, to do something that I knew both my parents would approve of.
Do that from the beginning close.
If you just hold this a little closer, you can solve it.
Let me make a good beginning here.
My mother is a concert harpsichordist, and so from as young as I can remember, I remember seeing her on stage playing that beautiful music.
having such control, but most of all getting the applause at the end.
And I think I started playing the cello when I was seven, mainly because I felt at that time that music was simply a good thing to do.
It was something that would not only make my parents happy, but I knew it was something I'd approve of, and hopefully it would give me the kind of control over my life that my mother has.
So one problem for me playing the cello is that for many years, right up to the time I entered college as a music major, I think I played music for the wrong reason, which is rather than playing it because I had a deep love for it, I played it because I wanted to reach the goal of being a concert musician.
And once I got to college and saw the other music majors and saw how much more serious about it they were than me, that's when I decided to take Chinese.
put that down.
That's good, that's excellent.
I think that's the one we'll lose, because it's terrific.
So what's the difference between the character here and my own life is that Reinhardt's mother is not a musician, but when she sees her son as extraordinarily gifted,
she devotes her life to making sure he achieves his potential, and that's a problem for Reinhardt because she takes such control over his life, he's not able to make many of his own decisions.
In my case, it was completely the opposite.
My mother is a musician, she's a teacher, she knows what a mistake it can be to push kids for the wrong reasons.
She was always reminding me to do this
only if I loved it.
But I, being stubborn, I felt this was a challenge.
I didn't take it literally.
I thought this was her way of finding out whether I was serious or not.
And the more she would say, do it for the love of it, the harder I would work to be great at it.
And so that's the main difference between, oh, and also I was not a prodigy by any means.
I have a good musical ear, but I was not extraordinary by any means.
So I quit playing the cello once I
got to college, I'd fool around with it after that, but it wasn't until I was writing this book that I picked it up again, and that's been one of the great joyful discoveries of my life, is that as I was writing this character and imagining what it would be like to play without the burden of this goal of being somebody that I wasn't, I'm describing his childhood as he's playing, and he's just really free when he's playing,
It was such an enjoyable experience that one day, it was literally one afternoon, I remember thinking suddenly, what if I were to imagine the same experience and I had a cello in my hands?
Would it work?
So I went right to a violin shop, rented a little cello, brought it home, played for about four or five hours without stopping, and ever since then I've practiced every day now.
I love it.
You picked it right back up.
Absolutely.
It happened in one afternoon since then.
It is such a source of joy.
You can see that little thing.
I have a portable cello I take with me in hotels, because it's so pleasant.
Why'd you point that out?
Go ahead, that gets in the story.
Yeah, I'll have to show you that thing, because that's really ingenious.
But anyway, now I do play two or three hours a day, and it's entirely different, an entirely different experience from when I was a kid.
Now practice used to seem like...
a grim exercise on the way toward a very attractive goal.
Now, just even playing scales, just producing sounds and making slow improvements, that in itself, that kind of problem solving and that kind of the play of harmony and melody and all, it's like playing a sandbox.
My wife has to literally get me to stop practicing every day and
Well, it's no longer practice in the traditional sense.
You're not training for something.
Exactly.
It's like reading for pleasure and reading because you have to, I think.
Yes, that's right.
I think you're doing this because it gives you pleasure.
No, you're not doing it because you're hoping to get a shot with the New York Film.
Yes, yes.
Maybe there's that as well, but I suspect not.
No, I don't think so.
As you said, you went to Yale, and the intention was to be a music major, and then you got into Chinese studies.
But of course there was no thought at that point about being a writer, about expressing yourself creatively through writing, which is how you've made your mark thus far.
I think people will dispute that.
Do you find, though, that the writing is kind of a surrogate way
express yourself creatively?
Well, I think, yes, I see just what you mean.
As a substitute for the music, I guess, is what I'm saying.
I suppose, I'm sure that in a sense that must be partially true, that I think like all of us, especially when I was a teenager, I yearned to have some creative outlet that I could do well enough that it would identify me as someone with ideas and not a complete slough off.
And what worked out well about writing with me is that I didn't have writing in mind.
I was sort of surprised by writing.
After that experience of living in China, when I came back, it was friends' suggestions that I try writing down some of the stories there.
So by having it come about sort of by accident that I discovered that I had a knack with words,
I didn't have a lot of that pressure at the beginning of expectations, and so that's why I think I feel that writing has been a very enjoyable process of learning about fiction, learning how to write every day, rather than something that I'd started off very early on and struggled with unrealistic expectations that I had to get through.
Again, the theme of the book, isn't it?
Yeah.
But let me also say, as one of those who have been writing for quite a few years, to make that leap into fiction, that's a whole other realm.
To have these characters just emerge, I'm sure they don't come full blown from the mind of Salzman, but you work at them and you feel them, and there is a chemistry that's going on here, call it a creative process, whatever.
There is an artistic side there that transcends the craft of writing, the art of writing and the craft of writing.
And I'm impressed by, as one who lived in the vineyards for many years, it would be something that you could think about doing the problem.
Well, the way I got into writing fiction was that after writing Iron and Silk, and then realizing I had a chance
At a career.
And at that time, I'd been just teaching martial arts in New Haven and hating it.
I thought, okay, I'd better get to work on a new book.
Everyone expected me to write another nonfiction, and I would have been happy to, except I didn't have anything left true to say.
You're pushing 30 at this point.
Yeah, yeah.
And I didn't have any other stories.
And also, I'm not an adventurer.
I didn't feel like getting on a plane and going to some new, uncomfortable place and having another experience just so I could write a book about it.
So I felt a little bit backed into a corner.
I felt fiction was the only way to go.
And so, in a sense, what was motivating me, I think, was the sense that this is probably, realistically, the only direction that I can take where I can stay at home every day and not have to... Yeah, so... Why did you move out to L.A., just out of curiosity?
My wife makes documentary films.
And also, she's from...
California from the Bay Area.
We lived there for a year.
I loved it, but there really wasn't any chance for her to work, so then we moved down, and oh, she loves it.
She's ecstatic in Los Angeles, and her enthusiasm has rubbed off on me.
I kind of went dragging my heels, because I'd only visited Los Angeles once before.
I hated it.
I remember saying,
Well, at least this is one place I know I'll never have to worry about, you know, wish that I lived there.
Here you are.
And now I live there, and I think once you make friends with a few people that you like, then it's all over.
It's home.
I've lived in the Bay Area for a number of years, but I've never liked L.A.
and down there.
But I have to say that while researching this book,
spending some time out there with my wife.
We love it.
Well, we spent a lot of time in the Huntington Library.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, you go to the garden.
How did they make out the earthquake?
I heard that they were fine and no trouble there.
And also the Getty, they say they had no, the only thing that broke was a reproduction of fake statue they had in the coffee shop.
That's good.
I'm sure that they constructed that.
Of course, it's on a hill here.
Yeah.
How about yourself?
Any earthquake experience that you relate to?
We frozen eastern?
Yeah, well, it was pretty shocking because we are in the valley and not too far from it.
And it was so powerful that when I kind of woke up, I was halfway across the room.
I'm not sure how I got there, so I think I got shaken right out of bed.
We had things tossed around, but luckily no structural damage.
But the most
The interesting part about it, I felt, was that the aftershocks were coming every two or three minutes of scenes.
And our cats managed to, you know, we looked for them all day, couldn't find them.
Finally, I looked under the bed and saw a giant gash under the box spring.
They had slashed open the box spring and both jumped up in there and dug their claws into the springs.
They wound up like little balls and we managed to coax them out.
And their tails were wound so tight between their legs that they were right under their chins, tickling their noses.
And we were trying to lift them out.
We flew down in Florida last year for the AVA.
We went out to the Everglades just for a little day trip.
And this was shortly after Hurricane Andrew and the woman for the National Park Association.
It's amazing.
The animals really survived it.
We came in expecting to find all these dead animals.
They found trees and everything and the structures and so on, but the animals were fine.
So there's something in there that's instinctive that they can prepare themselves.
By the way, what's your schedule?
Oh, you know, the appointment after this was put off a half an hour, so we're fine.
Okay.
I've got lots of stuff here.
Let's give it another 15 minutes.
Is that okay?
That's perfectly fine.
We did talk about your mother.
We talked about the plane.
The astronaut train.
I knew that was right.
Oh, the box?
That's absolutely true.
I used to sit in this box.
And the funny thing about it is that I had, which I don't know if I put that in the novel or not, but I had this little simple periscope with two mirrors, and to wait a clock off time was to watch all the afternoon programs, you know, sitting in this little box.
Oh, yeah, especially the mothers that would drop off their kids for my mother to teach, you know, where's your son?
Oh, he's in his box.
He's so well-behaved.
When you think of things that you did and things that you didn't do, I mean, would you like to be a pilot?
Well, as it turns out, I think now, no, because I'm really, I'm not a very, I'm very much a coward rather than an adventurer.
I like routine.
I like the safety of comfortable routines, and that allows me then to have my flights of fancy.
But what I liked about the whole thing of training for an astronaut is I guess I tend to be a bit obsessive.
I love to get obsessed with a task and to get so involved with it, to be so passionate about it that nothing can distract me.
And that's, I think, what I liked about the idea of being in a little box
going out in space is that I like being challenged by limitations and having to focus and not lose sight of what's going on.
That, I think, is what attracted me.
Plus, my dad, being an amateur astronomer, we used to go out every night with the telescope.
Then he gave me his old telescope after they retired, so I liked to stargaze a lot.
I guess I just am really attracted to the sort of chilling feeling you get when you're looking at objects that are unimaginably distant.
I know that book that you mentioned, that book of the photographs from space.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yes.
And that quote from the Soviet, the Russian guy, the incredible silence.
I spent crossing the Pacific on this aircraft carrier a number of times.
being out there, literally in the middle of the ocean, and thinking how you really get to see the sky.
It's like going up to Maine.
There's no pollution.
I remember thinking how silent it was, how fast, how magnificent.
And then to take it to that next step, to actually walk out
It must be, you can hear his blood going on.
I can see with that, it was a wonderful little image there.
It was a very familiar book.
What are you working on?
This could make a heck of a movie, I think, as well.
Have you optioned this?
No, not yet.
I hope someone does, of course, because it's sort of a sad, but
But the fortunate thing is that a writer can often make a better living just from optioning his books than from all the sales and advances altogether, even if it's not made.
So I'm hoping it gets options so that I can afford to write the next one.
Because frankly, the sale of a book, no matter how good it does, really you can't pay your bills from writing.
We'll see.
But I'm glad you said it.
I think it would make a nice movie.
Well it's good drive, and it's just got a story, which is important.
Characters that you can identify with, just looking at it.
It's a very nice movie.
The tour, your promotion tour, is how big?
I know it's the only thing about eight cities.
I'm surprised at that.
Well let's see, they've added on a couple.
It's altogether a little bit under three weeks.
Which is fine, I think, for me, because that's about my limit, I think, before I get so homesick and then I really, oh, I want to go back to my own routine.
Now, you're reading today at Borders, I think.
That's right.
Now, what do you read?
Actually, what I do is I usually read a very, I try to choose something extremely brief because I don't like, I don't enjoy hearing people read aloud very much, so I don't
I don't feel I do it well to others.
So what I do is actually, I just tell the story of how I got to writing this book, what interested me about it.
I like to tell a story about that conversation in the car.
So I try to make it
a little bit more than just a reading.
I try to make it an opportunity for them to hear, you know, why did this guy write this book?
And what personal experience does he have?
So that's generally what I do.
Could you read one twenty-second thing?
Just see what happens.
Maybe I can use it, you know.
I'm really excited about this.
I'm giving these guys three segments as well.
Oh, okay.
I'm giving them this Gershwin song book.
The Ira Gershwin lyrics, a big book that did 700 lyrics to all the songs.
I call it a time capsule of the book.
Give them a selection of things.
Let's see, you're thinking about 20, 30 seconds or so?
I'm just thinking, let's try something, and if I can use it when I put the thing together this afternoon, I'll use it.
All right.
Well, maybe one part I like is the part of it where Reinhardt and his teacher see the lunar eclipse, and the old teacher says, you know, is that all right?
Yeah.
One winter afternoon in Ederstasi, just after my eleventh birthday, my cello teacher
Von Kempen asked my mother and me to stay on for a while after the lesson to see what he called a celestial performance.
When the grandfather clock upstairs in his music room struck five o'clock, the three of us looked out the bay windows over his garden and saw the full moon, newly risen over the reservoir, glowing a dull copperish red.
"'Mundfinsternis,' he said reverently, "'a lunar eclipse.'
I asked what this meant, and he explained that the sun, the earth, and the moon were now perfectly aligned, so that the moon was now entirely in the earth's shadow.
It could receive no direct light from the sun.
So why can we still see it?
I asked.
The old master looked genuinely puzzled and limped over to his desk, where he picked up a newspaper and held it under a light, and using a huge magnifying glass read what was apparently a brief article about the eclipse.
Ah yes, dear boy, such a fine inquiring mind!
The paper tells us that the moon receives a bit of indirect sunlight thanks to our own Earth's atmosphere, which deflects the light and sends some of it toward the moon.
In spite of the moon's diminished brightness, I could see details on its surface more clearly than I ever had before, perhaps for the same reason that distant trees and mountains look sharper when seen through darkened glasses.
Von Kempen returned to the window to admire the scene further, then chuckled to himself.
"'I just thought of something,' he said, opening a fresh can of blended tobacco."
The moon and I, we have something in common.
Can you guess what it is?
No, I can't, Herr Professor.
Oh, come, take a guess at least.
I could never think quickly when put on the spot.
My mind went blank, but to satisfy my expectant teacher I blurted out, You both have reddish faces?
The old cellist laughed out loud, but my mother was horrified.
What a thing to say, she said loudly in English.
Thankfully, von Kempen leaped to my defense before she could scold me any further.
Not at all, mein Liebfrau Sundheimer.
The young maestro is quite right, but I was thinking of something else.
He lit his pipe, puffed at it dreamily, and then laughed quietly once again.
I am still visible because of you.
That is why I am like the moon.
How fortunate I am that you play the cello.
That was 270 and 271.
Excellent.
Okay.
You're from Connecticut now, just a little biographical background.
Yeah, small town in Connecticut, Bridgefield.
So I lived in Connecticut all together 25 years, because I went to school there, of course, at Yale, and then after Yale stayed on for three more years in New Haven.
So I've lived in Connecticut for 25 years, China for two, and now California for six, I guess.
Six years?
Yeah, let's see, 87 to now, this is our seventh year.
Okay, listen, I'm going to, in fact, would you inscribe this for me?
Oh, yeah.